FIRST LINE OF PACKET — if you cannot see this sentence, output only the words PACKET TRUNCATED

STATE: alabama
ASSEMBLED: 2026-09-04

CAPTURE NOTES:
- Captured by tools/capture.py from tools/recipes/alabama.json (recipe digest 8736087ebf91). Each source below was fetched and extracted by its recorded recipe; re-running that recipe against an unchanged source reproduces this text.
- SOURCE 1: transport curl; extractor pdftotext-layout; pages 21-25; filters none.
  The 2026-08-30 capture sliced this chapter by hand, from the heading SELECTING A NURSING HOME to the start of LONG TERM CARE INSURANCE. This recipe takes printed pages 21 to 25 instead, the range those two headings fall in, which is reproducible where a hand cut is not; the captured text is a superset of the standing one and contains it exactly. The page numbers, the text wrapped around the guide's inset illustrations, and the numbering of the rights list are the document's own.
- SOURCE 2: transport curl; extractor html-text; scope body; filters trim-lines, collapse-blank-runs.
  The 2026-08-30 capture recorded that this page refused plain curl and was taken through a rendered fetch instead. Re-tested 2026-09-04: it answers curl with a pinned browser user-agent normally, so the source is recipe-driven rather than agent-fetched from here on. That is a fact about the host's behaviour today, checked rather than assumed. The department's email obfuscation left two placeholders in the standing capture; decode_cfemail in the shared reader resolves them (FA-Q-20260902-01, FA-Q-20260904-04).

SOURCE 1: Alabama Department of Senior Services, Elder Rights Guide for Older Alabamians — nursing home chapter (PDF, published on alabamapublichealth.gov) | https://www.alabamapublichealth.gov/homehealth/assets/elderrightsguide.pdf | source date: none stated on document | retrieved: 2026-09-04
CHAPTER 4:
LONG TERM CARE

Nursing homes provide care to people who can’t be cared for at home or in the
community. If you think that Medicare will have your costs covered should you need a
nursing home stay, think again. If you have Medicare and are hospitalized for at least
three days (not counting the day of discharge) and certified as needing skilled care,
Medicare will pay all costs for up to 20 days in a skilled care facility. If you continue to
be certified as needing skilled care, Medicare will pay part of the costs for up to another
80 days, but you will be responsible for a daily co-payment. This co-pay is covered by
some Medigap (Medicare Supplement) policies.

Medicare will pay for a limited amount of home health care under certain conditions, but
even the maximum available reimbursement is not enough to cover twenty-four hour
care.


SELECTING A NURSING HOME

Before selecting a nursing home for you or a
loved one, it’s important to understand the
distinction between the types of nursing home
care. A nursing home generally provides
several levels of care—skilled nursing care,
intermediate care and custodial care. Skilled
nursing care is when you need skilled nursing
or rehabilitation staff to manage, observe and
evaluate your care. An example of skilled
nursing care is when you need intravenous
injections or physical therapy. A skilled
nursing facility can be part of a nursing home
or hospital. At the other end of the scale is
custodial care. Custodial care is non-skilled
personal care which helps with activities of
daily living such as bathing, dressing, eating,
getting in and out of a bed or chair, moving


                                            -19-

around and using the bathroom. In most cases, Medicare does not pay for custodial care.

Nursing homes provide a wide range of personal care and health services. For most
people, this care is generally to assist with support services such as dressing and bathing
or assisting those with physical, emotional or mental problems.

When selecting a nursing home, you must consider your medical and physical needs.
Your family, friends and health care providers can help you decide what kind of care you
need. You must also consider the costs of each nursing home and your financial resources
including Long Term Care Insurance, Medicare and Medicaid, to be sure you find a
nursing home you can afford. Additionally, you should try to find a nursing home located
convenient to your friends and family because their visits will be important to you.

It is important that you find the nursing home that best suits your needs. When inquiring
about a specific nursing home, be sure to ask the right questions. Here are some
important things to consider and questions to ask when you are visiting different nursing
homes:

                                        Licensure. Is the nursing home and administrator
                                        licensed and is the license in danger of being
                                        revoked, suspended, or not renewed?

                                        Nursing/Physician Services. What level of care
                                        is provided and is there a staff physician who
                                        makes emergency calls?

                                        Activities. Does the nursing home have a variety
                                        of scheduled activities that may be of interest to
                                        you?

                                        Staffing. Is there enough staff available to assist
                                        residents and do they respond in a timely manner
                                        to a resident’s call for help?

                                        Cleanliness. Is the nursing home clean and
                                        pleasant and do the residents appear to be clean
                                        and well groomed?

                                      Cost. What is the cost of care in the nursing
                                      home? What services are included in this price
   and what additional costs will have to be paid?

   Dietary service. Does the nursing home serve attractive, nutritious meals that are
   planned by a Registered Dietician? Are special diets available?




                                            -20-

   Safety. Is there an adequate fire safety system that includes smoke and heat detectors
   as well as sprinklers or approved fire resistant construction?

   Privacy and Respect. Are the residents treated with respect and dignity and do they
   have as much privacy as possible? Are the residents treated as adults and not
   children?

   Policies. What policies does the nursing home have about visiting hours, gifts of
   food, etc.?


PATIENT RIGHTS

Residents of nursing homes have many rights under state and federal law. Under federal
guidelines, each nursing facility must develop and implement written policies and
procedures prohibiting mistreatment, neglect, or abuse of residents. Each facility must
also ensure that all alleged violations of these policies are reported immediately to the
facility administrator or other officials and must demonstrate that all alleged policy
violations are thoroughly investigated.

A resident in a nursing facility is entitled to receive verbal and written notice of the rights
and services to which he or she is entitled. This notice must be given prior to or upon
admission, and periodically throughout the resident’s stay, in a language the resident
understands.

A nursing home resident is entitled to the following:

   1. The right to see family members, ombudsmen, or other resident advocates,
      physicians, service providers and representatives of the state and federal
      government.

   2. The right to keep and use personal possessions and clothing unless doing so
      would endanger health and safety.

   3. The right to apply for and receive Medicare and Medicaid benefits and cannot be
      asked to leave a home because they receive such benefits.

   4. The right to receive the same treatment as other residents regardless of whether
      they are private payers or Medicare or Medicaid recipients.

   5. The right to keep clinical and personal records confidential.

   6. The right to choose their own personal physician.

   7. The right to be fully informed about their medical care.



                                             -21-

8. The right to obtain lists of services paid by Medicare and Medicaid benefits.

9. The right to participate in the planning of care and treatment and to refuse
   treatment.

10. The right to be free from mental and physical abuse.

11. The right to not be kept apart from other residents against their will.

12. The right to not be tied down or given drugs to restrain when restraint is not
    necessary to treat medical symptoms.

13. The right to raise grievances and have them resolved in a timely manner.

14. The right to participate in social, religious and community activities to the extent
                                         that they do not interfere with the rights of other
                                         residents.

                                    15. The right to choose whether or not personal
                                        funds are managed by the nursing home.

                                    16. The right to privacy regarding medical
                                        treatment, visits, communications and meetings
                                        with family and resident groups.

                                    17. The right to review medical records within 24
                                        hours of making a request.

                                    18. The right to review the most recent state
                                        inspection report relating to the nursing home.

19. The right to receive notice before their room or roommate is changed and the right
    to refuse the transfer if the purpose is to move them from a Medicare bed to a
    Medicaid bed or vice versa.

20. The right to stay in the nursing home unless removal is necessary for the
    resident’s welfare, the resident no longer requires services, the failure to pay after
    reasonable notice, to prevent harm to others or the facility ceases to operate.

21. The right to thirty days notice of a proposed transfer or discharge with the right to
    appeal.

22. The right to be informed by the nursing home of the length of time that a
    resident’s bed will be held open for their return in the event they are transferred
    for hospitalization or therapy, and the right to be readmitted as soon as the first




                                         -22-

       semi-private bed becomes available if returned after the expiration of the bedhold
       period.



LONG TERM CARE OMBUDSMAN

The Alabama Department of Senior Services administers a Long Term Care Ombudsman
program that provides services to protect individuals residing in nursing facilities,
assisted living facilities, specialty care facilities and boarding homes. Ombudsmen are
advocates for residents, or their friends and families, who work to protect the health,
safety, welfare and rights of Alabama’s senior citizens. The Ombudsman’s job is to
protect the rights of residents and ensure they receive fair treatment and quality care. Call
1-800-AGELINE to reach your local Ombudsman.



LONG TERM CARE INSURANCE

Long term care insurance is commercial insurance. Like other private insurance the terms
and costs vary among different companies. Long term care insurance usually pays a fixed
amount per day for qualifying care. The periods of coverage may range from two years to
life. There are many variables that affect the cost of
premiums: length of the deductible period, period of
coverage, amount of daily benefit, whether there is an
automatic inflation factor built in, what kinds of care
are covered, and others. It pays to shop around and
seek the features you want.

Do you need long term care insurance?

There are several considerations you should keep in
mind when you are considering purchasing long term
care insurance. Women are more likely to need
nursing home care than men and they are less likely
to have the incomes and resources to pay for it.
Married men are likely to be cared for by spouses,
while women on average live longer—into ages at
which disabling illnesses are common.

Resources are also a consideration. If you are single with less than $50,000 in resources
plus a home, or married with combined assets of less than $75,000 plus a home, the cost
of long term care insurance may not be justified by the amount of resources to be
protected.




                                            -23-

SOURCE 2: Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards — Filing Complaints | https://www.alabamapublichealth.gov/providerstandards/complaints.html | source date: page states its own last-updated date | retrieved: 2026-09-04
Skip to Main Content

Alabama Public Health

Healthy People. Healthy Communities. Healthy Alabama.

Login

Locations

Careers

Contact

Login

Locations

Careers

Contact

Who We Are

What We Do

Who We Serve

A-Z

Search

Who We Are

What We Do

Who We Serve

A-Z

Search

Menu

Back

Who We Are

What We Do

Who We Serve

A-Z Index

Login

Locations

Careers

Contact

About Us

Strategic Plan

Administration

Health Departments

Silent Guardians of Health

View All

 Newsroom

Organizational Chart

Annual Report

Guides to Services

Alabama's Health

View All

Quick Links

Login Portal

Calendar

Certificates, Licenses, & Permits

Laws and Regulations

Help/FAQ

 Contact Us

Free Communication Assistance

Careers at ADPH

Job Recruiters

Clinical and Other Direct Services

Family Planning

Nursing Division

WIC

Worksite Wellness

Vital Records

View All

Disease Prevention & Control

Clinical Laboratories

HIV/AIDS

Immunization

Infectious Diseases & Outbreaks

Sexually Transmitted Diseases

View All

 Environmental Services

Food, Milk and Lodging

Indoor Lead/Asbestos/Air Pollution

Onsite Sewage

View All

Preventative and Other Services

ALL Babies

ALL Kids

Rural Health

Tobacco Prevention & Control

Women's Health

View All

Population Health Services

Cancer Registry (ASCR)

Center for Health Statistics

Emergency Preparedness

Injury Prevention

View All

Regulation, Licensure, and Training

ALPHTN

Emergency Medical Services (EMS)

Health Care Facilities

Pharmacy

Radiation Control

View All

 Women

Breast & Cervical Cancer

Family Planning

Perinatal Health

Plan First

WIC

View All

 Children

ALL Babies

ALL Kids

Newborn Screening

Oral Health

View All

Health Professionals

EMS

Lead Contractors

Laboratories

Pharmacists

Radiographers

Others

Healthcare Facilities

Men

Seniors

Teens

A
B
C
D
E
F
G
H
I
J
K
L
M
N
O
P
Q
R
S
T
U
V
W
X
Y
Z

Having trouble finding what you are looking for? Use our A to Z Index or Contact Us.

<div class="input-group-append search-label">
 <span class="input-group-text">
 <button id="searchButton" class="ss360-n-button" aria-label="Search" value="Search" style="font-size: 12px; cursor: pointer; background-color:#1E9DD0;outline:none; color:white;">Search</button>
 </span>
 </div>

Close Search

<section class="page-section page-section-banner bg-img mb-0" style="background-image:url('')" title="photos of healthcare providers and patients">

<div class="page-section banner-site-title m-0 bg-img" style="background-image:url('../images/headers/providerstandards.jpg');box-shadow: inset 0 0 0 1000px rgba(0,0,0,.5);" >

 Bureau of Health Provider Standards

Home

Health Provider Standards

Filing Complaints

Font Size:

 Increase Font

 Increase Font

 Share & Bookmark

 Print

Menu

Health Provider Standards Home

Facilities Descriptions

Facilities Directory

Facilities Questions

Facilities Rules

Visitation Rights

Advance Directives

Pre-License Filing

Licensure Application

Palliative Care

Nursing Homes

Activity Certification

MDS Information

OASIS Information

Forms

Publications

Medical Director Meetings

CLIA

Civil Money Penalty (CMP) Fund Grants

Licensure Advisory Board Meetings

Filing Complaints

Contact Us

MCC

NEED HELP?

Having trouble finding what you are looking for? Use our A to Z Index.

Filing Complaints

Acute and Continuing Care Facility

Assisted Living Facility

Home Health or Hospice Agency

Nursing Home

Visitation Rights

To File a Complaint Against an Acute and Continuing Care Facility

E-mail us at ACCComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Call the Bureau of Health Provider Standards Complaint Hotline at 1-800-356-9596; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ACC Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

These include:

Abortion or Reproductive Health Centers

Ambulatory Surgical Centers

Cerebral Palsy Centers

End Stage Renal Disease Treatment and Transplant Centers

Hospitals

Portable X-Ray Suppliers

Rehabilitation Centers

Rural Health Clinics

Sleep Disorder Facilities

To File a Complaint Against an Assisted Living Facility

E-mail us at ALFComplaints@adph.state.al.us;

Call the Assisted Living Facilities complaint hotline at 1-866-873-0366; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ALF Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint Against a Home Health or Hospice Agency

E-mail us at ACCComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Call the Bureau of Health Provider Standards Home Health and Hospice Complaint Hotline at 1-800-356-9596; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ACC Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint Against a Nursing Home

If you have a complaint about the care of a resident in a nursing home located in Alabama, the Alabama State Survey Agency has the regulatory responsibility for all nursing homes in the state.

Examples of reasons for filing a complaint:

Abuse

Neglect

Poor care

Insufficient staff

Unsafe or unsanitary conditions

Dietary problems

Mistreatment

Complete the Nursing Home Complaint Form. You may complete this fillable form and submit it electronically to the department's complaint email address for nursing home complaints. Other ways to file a complaint:

For elder complaints, contact the ElderCare Hotline at 1-800-356-9596.

For nursing home complaints, email us at NHComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint for Violations of In-Person Visitation Rights

If you would like to file a complaint regarding visitation rights in Alabama health care facilities, please click the appropriate link:

General Acute Hospital

Long Term Care Facility

Skilled Nursing Facility

Assisted Living Facility

Specialty Care Assisted

Page last updated: March 30, 2026

NEED HELP?

Having trouble finding what you are looking for? Use our A to Z Index.

facebook-f

instagram

brands fa-x-twitter

youtube

exclamation-triangle

bug

En Español

Privacy

Statements & Policies

Free Communication Assistance

Alabama.gov

Back To Top

