CANARY: captured source packet — the text under each SOURCE header is the publisher's own, appended mechanically; do not edit, retype, or annotate inside source bodies.
STATE: Alabama
SLUG: alabama
SUPPLEMENT: complaints-page email addresses, recovered by decoding
ASSEMBLED: 2026-09-03
CAPTURE NOTES: This supplement re-captures the Bureau of Health Provider Standards complaints page for one reason: the standing packet's copy of it holds the department's email addresses as Cloudflare's placeholder text rather than as addresses. The Aug 30 capture recorded the page as it rendered to a text fetch, and the note in that packet says so plainly. What neither that note nor this project understood at the time is that the placeholder is not a limit of the capture: Cloudflare's obfuscation is a one-byte XOR carried in the page's own markup, so the plaintext is already in the bytes curl receives, and decoding it is extraction rather than interpretation. The capture tool decodes those attributes as of 2026-09-03 and this capture is the first here to carry the addresses the department publishes. Four are on the page; the one this state's page needed is the nursing-home complaint address. Transport: curl, no browser user-agent required, HTTP 200; extractor html-text at scope main; filters trim-lines and collapse-blank-runs. The standing packet is unchanged and remains the evidence for everything already quoted from it.
PENDING: nothing for this supplement; it exists to carry addresses the standing packet holds only as placeholders.

SOURCE 1: Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards — Filing Complaints (re-captured with Cloudflare email decoding) | https://www.alabamapublichealth.gov/providerstandards/complaints.html | source's own date: Page last updated: March 30, 2026 | retrieved: 2026-09-03
<section class="page-section page-section-banner bg-img mb-0" style="background-image:url('')" title="photos of healthcare providers and patients">

<div class="page-section banner-site-title m-0 bg-img" style="background-image:url('../images/headers/providerstandards.jpg');box-shadow: inset 0 0 0 1000px rgba(0,0,0,.5);" >

 Bureau of Health Provider Standards

Home

Health Provider Standards

Filing Complaints

Font Size:

 Increase Font

 Increase Font

 Share & Bookmark

 Print

Menu

Health Provider Standards Home

Facilities Descriptions

Facilities Directory

Facilities Questions

Facilities Rules

Visitation Rights

Advance Directives

Pre-License Filing

Licensure Application

Palliative Care

Nursing Homes

Activity Certification

MDS Information

OASIS Information

Forms

Publications

Medical Director Meetings

CLIA

Civil Money Penalty (CMP) Fund Grants

Licensure Advisory Board Meetings

Filing Complaints

Contact Us

MCC

NEED HELP?

Having trouble finding what you are looking for? Use our A to Z Index.

Filing Complaints

Acute and Continuing Care Facility

Assisted Living Facility

Home Health or Hospice Agency

Nursing Home

Visitation Rights

To File a Complaint Against an Acute and Continuing Care Facility

E-mail us at ACCComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Call the Bureau of Health Provider Standards Complaint Hotline at 1-800-356-9596; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ACC Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

These include:

Abortion or Reproductive Health Centers

Ambulatory Surgical Centers

Cerebral Palsy Centers

End Stage Renal Disease Treatment and Transplant Centers

Hospitals

Portable X-Ray Suppliers

Rehabilitation Centers

Rural Health Clinics

Sleep Disorder Facilities

To File a Complaint Against an Assisted Living Facility

E-mail us at ALFComplaints@adph.state.al.us;

Call the Assisted Living Facilities complaint hotline at 1-866-873-0366; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ALF Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint Against a Home Health or Hospice Agency

E-mail us at ACCComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Call the Bureau of Health Provider Standards Home Health and Hospice Complaint Hotline at 1-800-356-9596; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: ACC Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint Against a Nursing Home

If you have a complaint about the care of a resident in a nursing home located in Alabama, the Alabama State Survey Agency has the regulatory responsibility for all nursing homes in the state.

Examples of reasons for filing a complaint:

Abuse

Neglect

Poor care

Insufficient staff

Unsafe or unsanitary conditions

Dietary problems

Mistreatment

Complete the Nursing Home Complaint Form. You may complete this fillable form and submit it electronically to the department's complaint email address for nursing home complaints. Other ways to file a complaint:

For elder complaints, contact the ElderCare Hotline at 1-800-356-9596.

For nursing home complaints, email us at NHComplaints@adph.state.al.us; or

Write a letter of complaint addressed to: ATTN: Complaint Unit, Alabama Department of Public Health, Bureau of Health Provider Standards, 201 Monroe Street, Suite 700, Montgomery, AL 36130-3017

To File a Complaint for Violations of In-Person Visitation Rights

If you would like to file a complaint regarding visitation rights in Alabama health care facilities, please click the appropriate link:

General Acute Hospital

Long Term Care Facility

Skilled Nursing Facility

Assisted Living Facility

Specialty Care Assisted

Page last updated: March 30, 2026

NEED HELP?

Having trouble finding what you are looking for? Use our A to Z Index.
END SOURCE 1

END OF PACKET — 1 source
